High in this video we're going to continue looking at truth values and we're going to jump straight
into the code so first things first.
We saw that we can call the constructor Well let's say a value of 1.
And we get a true value back we can call it a value of zero and we get a false value back.
In fact we can cope with any integer and there may be negative 1 and there will also return true.
So be careful.
By the way here in some other languages negative one is sometimes used to indicate a false not so in
Python the only integer value that really is false is zero.
Everything else that is non-zero will be true.
So even all of negative one or even bhool of 100 all that returns true.
What's happening here is not that we are converting that integer to a boolean.
What's happening instead is that special method that we discussed called donder bool Donder.
And that is a special method that gets called when we call bhool of x.
What's happening is that Python is looking for at at the variable x this parameter x which is an object
and it's looking for an instance method called Donder.
If it finds it it runs it and then puts that as the return value for doesn't find it.
It tries to look for the Dunder Len method and it will return whatever that value is.
So if that value that say it's 0 0 for a sequence of length zero it will return 0 then we'll get 0 back
and 0 has a truthiness of false.
It is false.
And if there are elements in the sequence then of course the length is going to be greater than zero
it's going to be a nonzero number in which case the truth in this will be true will be truth.
So let's take a look we can actually see this when we look at the help and the counsel.
So we can look in help on it and if we scroll down a little bit you'll see that we have this done the
method defined.
So it defines this method right here.
And all it does it just returns the instance value that self not equal to zero.
So it runs this test this comparison test.
So when we did bhool 100 it really just ran this.
It executed this statement and return that.
And that's the same thing that happened when we did a ball 100.
We got that when we called bull 0.
OK which remember was that all we did was really just evaluate this expression.
And we got false.
So in fact what's happening when you call bull 100 you're actually what Python is actually doing it's
taking 100 hundred not going to put parentheses around it but it's it's the integer 100.
And then we're going to call that bhool method with special donder before and after it.
And we could see it's the same thing.
If we did all of 0 that's the same thing as calling 0 Dondre 2.
And we get false in both cases.
So that's really what's happening and all the objects in Python will implement this bool method or this
lende method or potentially neither of the two in which case the object will always be truthy.
But for example we can look at a list and if we look at the list we'll see that we'll find another is
NO BULL method but there is a len method.
There we go.
And the Lenn method returns the length of the sequence.
And this is why the true value of a sequence is 0 only always false only when the length is 0 because
0 has a false truth value.
Right.
We saw that bull of 0 is false right.
So if we have a list like a equals let's say an empty list when we call bhool of k what we're really
doing here is we're calling a well let's do a.
Well no I don't mean the parentheses here a dunder led Dondre which is returning 0 and bhool of 0 is
false.
Right.
So in fact we're getting Boole.
So when we say bhool of a which returns false what's really going on is we're looking at bhool of a
donder Len k.
So behind the scenes that's what's happening and that's how we're getting these true and false values
that are associated with all objects an object doesn't have the bool method and doesn't have the lend
method then it will always just be true.
OK so let's look at the numeric types.
So if we look at numeric types we saw that for integers but it really works the same for any numeric
type.
So I can take a float like zero point zero.
We can look at a complex number zero plus zero J for example and we'll get false in both cases.
Same thing if we want to work with let's say the decimal class and maybe roll on from decimal import
decimal and let's even do this for fractions from fractions and bought books.
Fraction Let's impose those two classes and let's do bhool of a fraction.
Now we're going to do we want to zero fractions output zero in the numerator.
But of course we can't put zero in the denominator that would give us a problem but zero overworn is
zero.
So we'll look at that and we'll also look at the pool of frac or decimal and we'll you know we'll make
the decimal 0.
So when we do that we get false again.
In both cases and that this will work the same for any numeric type.
If it's a non-zero value it will always be true.
So we could say bhool of let's say ten point five we could say rule of 1 j there will be a complex number.
We can say bool of fraction
one can add two and maybe move of decimal ten point five.
If we do that then we'll get that the corresponding truth values are all true.
So that's how it works for numbers for the numeric types.
Next we can look at the sequence types and remember the rule is that every object or every sequence
will be true.
Right.
We'll have a true truth value unless the sequence is empty has nothing in it.
So for example we can take a equal to an empty list.
We can set B to maybe an empty string.
Right and maybe see to an empty table.
So now if we look at bhool of a rule of B and BU of C we get false in all cases because they have no
elements in them.
On the other hand if we populate that and let's put a few characters in the string and let's put maybe
the Stapel this way.
So now all sequences have elements in them.
So the length will be nonzero.
And in that case they turn out to have a truth value of true.
So that's how it works for sequences not mapping types are the same mapping types you can have a dictionary.
Let's do an empty dictionary that we can define this way or if you prefer.
You can also just use the constructor whichever.
I'm going to use the literal and we can do a set.
Now assert.
Technically this would be a set.
Right.
This is a set and we cannot use the literal constructor this way that would construct a dictionary.
So instead here we do have to use the constructor to create an empty set.
So in both cases we have an empty mapping type.
You can see here that a is just an empty dictionary and B is an empty set.
And if we look at bhool of a and b of B.
Well they're both falsie right.
But if we populate values into that let's say we have a single key value pair in there and maybe we
put a couple of elements in the set in which case by the way you can write it now this way.
Python is able to differentiate that.
This is a set as opposed to this which is a dictionary because of the code on here.
And we'll see dictionaries and sets in a lot more detail in an upcoming section in the scores.
So now we can see the values in it and the truth values are true.
So they both truthy because they have elements in them.
Now the known object is special and it always just evaluates to false and that's pretty interesting
because this allows you to use it in statements.
Now the way it works is that when you have a boolean expression in Python you can actually put instead
of boolean values you can put objects in there and what will happen is that Python will detect that
and we'll realize that.
Wait a minute.
I was expecting a boolean value here.
Right.
So what am I going to do.
Well it's actually going to look at the associated truth value instead.
So that's why this works in an IF statement.
So for example let's say we do this equal.
So this is one application of all this.
Let's say we have a sequence we have a which is a sequence a list.
In this case and we want to do something with variable pay but only if it exists and if it's non-empty.
So one way to write this would be to say if eight is not None.
And the land for a is greater than zero.
Right.
We're explicitly saying what we want and maybe I will print the first element of that sequence.
Otherwise I will print nothing to see if you get.
And when we execute this well it passed the test.
It is not known because a is you know this thing here and AIT has a length greater than zero it has
three elements in it but we can write this in a different way.
We can say if a.
And then I'm just going to copy the rest right here.
And this will work exactly the same way.
Why.
Well the first thing if a while it's looking at essentially this.
Right.
That's the first step that it takes.
But Python will do that implicitly for us.
We don't have to put the ball in front so it's going to look at the truthiness of a it's going to look
at the associated truth.
Now it is not None.
So that is true right.
The truthiness of A as long as A is not not is true.
Furthermore the length of A is greater than zero.
So it's going to say OK while the length of A is greater than zero so I'm getting again a true value
back.
If A was none I would get false here.
And if a was not known but the length was equal to zero I would also get a false since 0 evaluates to
false.
So if we do this if we say A is equal to the empty list then we'll get nothing to see here.
If we put a equal to none we'll get the same result.
Nothing to see here.
So basically this and of course we don't even have to put the ball in front.
Let's just check.
As you can see so this statement here in this case is equivalent to this statement here.
So it's just a little more concise but it does precisely what we expected to do.
Now if you do write things over here this way which you certainly can.
You've got to be also a little careful because if you were to write it this way
we could also run into some trouble.
Let's say that A equals one Comet too.
All right.
So that's fine.
That works.
Let's say that A is empty.
Well that works as well.
Right.
But let's say that A is equal to none.
Then what's going to happen here is that it's going to calculate for the length of a and see if it's
greater than zero.
Well is none the non-object doesn't have a len method done the lend method.
So this is going to fail.
So when we run this as you can see we get this the Nunn type has no Lenn function defined.
So again so if you do write it out you certainly can and we'll take a look at this.
It's called short circuiting.
Why didn't it fail.
If a is not None.
And what happened and what Again we'll look at that in much more detail later.
But what's happening here is that is none of this is coming back to false.
And so it doesn't have to be even evaluated that this piece occurred and that's why this runs without
any problems.
It doesn't fail.
Whereas this one when we had left a in front did just a minor thing that I wanted to point out that
you should be careful with.
All right.
I think that's really all there is to say about the truthiness of objects.
They all have an associated truth value and it can be put to really good use things like this you might
want to use that.
So if you're connecting to a database and you're getting a field back from the you or from a table that
is a string and maybe it's a nullable field so you can get one of three situations you could get a null
value back which would be none.
You might get an empty string back which would be a you know a list essentially a string that exists
but it's empty and just doesn't have any characters in it.
Or you might actually get characters and you may want to only handle the field.
If it's both not no and not empty.
That's something that's very frequent when you're working with text fields and databases.
So that's a good use of it there.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.